# Algebra, Number Theory and Combinatorics

Individual (Please select 5 problems to solve)

1. Let $V$ be a finite dimensional complex vector space. Let $A , B$ be two linear endomorphisms of $V$ satisfying $A B - B A = B$ . Prove that there is a common eigenvector for $A$ and $B$ .

2. Let $M _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { R } )$ be the ring of $2 \times 2$ matrices with real entries. Its group of multiplicative units is $G L _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { R } )$ , consisting of invertible matrices in $M _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { R } )$ .

(a) Find an injective homomorphism from the field $\mathbb { C }$ of complex numbers into the ring $M _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { R } )$ .   
(b) Show that if $\phi _ { 1 }$ and $\phi _ { 2 }$ are two such homomorphisms, then there exists a $g \in G L _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { R } )$ such that $\phi _ { 2 } ( x ) = g \phi _ { 1 } ( x ) g ^ { - 1 }$ for all $x \in \mathbb { C }$ .   
(c) Let $h$ be an element in $G L _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { R } )$ whose characteristic polynomial $f ( x )$ is irreducible over $\mathbb { R }$ . Let $F \subset M _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { R } )$ be the subring generated by $h$ and $a \cdot I$ for all $a \in \mathbb R$ , where $I$ is the idenity matrix. Show that $F$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb { C }$ .   
(d) Let $h ^ { \prime }$ be any element in $G L _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { R } )$ with the same characteristic polynomial $f ( x )$ as $h$ in (c). Show that $h$ and $h ^ { \prime }$ are conjugate in $G L _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { R } )$ .   
(e) If $f ( x )$ in (c) and (d) is reducible over $\mathbb { R }$ , will the same conclusion on $h$ and $h ^ { \prime }$ hold? Give reasons.

3. Let $G$ be a non-abelian finite group. Let $c ( G )$ be the number of conjugacy classes in $G$ Define $\overline { { c } } ( G ) : = c ( G ) / | G |$ , $\left[ | G | = \operatorname { C a r d } ( G ) \right)$ .

(a) Prove that $\textstyle { \overline { { c } } } ( G ) \leq { \frac { 5 } { 8 } }$   
(b) Is there a finite group $H$ with $\begin{array} { r } { \overline { { c } } ( H ) = \frac { 5 } { 8 } } \end{array}$   
(c) (open ended question) Suppose that there exists a prime number $p$ and an element $x \in G$ such that the cardinality of the conjugacy class of $x$ is divisible by $p$ . Find a good/sharp upper bound for ${ \overline { { c } } } ( G )$ .

4. Let $F$ be a splitting field over $\mathbb { Q }$ the polynomial $x ^ { 8 } - 5 \in \mathbb { Q } [ x ]$ . Recall that $F$ is the subfield of $\mathbb { C }$ generated by all roots of this polynomial.

(a) Find the degree $\left[ F : \mathbb { Q } \right]$ of the number field $F$ .   
(b) Determine the Galois group $\operatorname { G a l } ( F / \mathbb { Q } )$

5. Let $T \subset \mathbb { N } _ { > 0 }$ be a finite set of positive integers. For each integer $n > 0$ , define $a _ { n }$ to be the number of all finite sequences $\left( t _ { 1 } , \ldots , t _ { m } \right)$ with $m \leq n$ , $t _ { i } \in T$ for all $i = 1 , \ldots , m$ and $t _ { 1 } + . . . + t _ { m } = n$ . Prove that the infinite series

$$
1 + \sum_ {n \geq 1} a _ {n} z ^ {n} \in \mathbb {C} [ [ z ] ]
$$

is a rational function in $z$ , and find this rational function.

6. Describe all the irreducible complex representations of the group $S _ { 4 }$ (the symmetric group on four letters).