# S.-T. Yau College Student Mathematics Contests 2024

# Algebra and Number Theory

# Question 1. Let $G$ be a finite group.

(1) Let $K$ be a field. Show that $G$ has a finite-dimensional faithful $K$ -linear representation.   
(2) Show that $G$ has a faithful one-dimensional complex representation if and only if $G$ is cyclic.   
(3) Assume moreover that $G$ is commutative. Let $n \geq 1$ be an integer. Show that $G$ has a faithful $n$ -dimensional complex representation if and only if $G$ can be generated by n elements.   
(4) Classify all finite groups having a faithful 2-dimensional real representation.

Question 2. Let $n \geq 1$ be an integer. Let $A$ be a discrete valuation ring with $K$ its field of fractions and $\pi \in A$ a uniformizer. For $\lambda = ( \lambda _ { 1 } , \ldots , \lambda _ { n } ) \in \mathbb { Z } ^ { n }$ write

$$
D _ {\lambda} = \operatorname {d i a g} (\pi^ {\lambda_ {1}}, \ldots , \pi^ {\lambda_ {n}}) = \left( \begin{array}{c c c c} \pi^ {\lambda_ {1}} & 0 & \ldots & 0 \\ 0 & \pi^ {\lambda_ {2}} & \ldots & 0 \\ \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\ 0 & 0 & \ldots & \pi^ {\lambda_ {n}} \end{array} \right) \in \mathbf {G L} _ {n} (K).
$$

Show that, for $\lambda , \mu \in \mathbb { Z } ^ { n }$ , the following intersection inside ${ \bf G L } _ { n } ( K )$

$$
\mathbf {G L} _ {n} (A) \cdot D _ {\mu} \cdot \mathbf {G L} _ {n} (A) \bigcap \mathbf {U} (K) \cdot D _ {\lambda}
$$

is non-empty if and only if $\lambda _ { \mathrm { d o m } } \leq \mu _ { \mathrm { d o m } }$ . Here

• $\mathbf { G L } _ { n } ( K )$ (resp. $\mathbf { G L } _ { n } ( A ) ,$ ) is the group of invertible $n \times n$ square matrices with coefficients in $K$ (resp. in $A$ ), and $\mathbf { U } ( K ) \subset \mathbf { G L } _ { n } ( K )$ is the standard unipotent subgroup, that is, the subgroup of upper triangular matrices with coefficients 1 on the diagonal.   
• for $\alpha = ( a _ { 1 } , \ldots , a _ { n } )$ and $\beta = ( b _ { 1 } , \ldots , b _ { n } )$ two elements in $\mathbb { Z } ^ { n }$ , we write $\alpha \le \beta$ if

$$
\sum_ {i = 1} ^ {k} a _ {i} \leq \sum_ {i = 1} ^ {k} b _ {i}, \quad f o r a n y 1 \leq k \leq n,
$$

and if $\textstyle \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } a _ { i } = \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { n } b _ { i }$ . Write also $\alpha _ { \mathrm { d o m } } : = ( a _ { 1 } ^ { \prime } , \ldots , a _ { n } ^ { \prime } )$ with $a _ { 1 } ^ { \prime } , \ldots , a _ { n } ^ { \prime }$ an arrangement of $a _ { 1 } , \ldots , a _ { n }$ such that

$$
a _ {1} ^ {\prime} \geq a _ {2} ^ {\prime} \geq \dots \geq a _ {n} ^ {\prime}.
$$

Question 3. Let $k$ be an imperfect field of characteristic $p > 0$ . Let $a \in k \setminus k ^ { p }$ .

(1) Show that the polynomial $X ^ { p } - a \in k [ X ]$ is irreducible.   
(2) Let $A = k [ X ] / ( X ^ { p ^ { 2 } } - a X ^ { p } )$ . Compute $A _ { \mathrm { r e d } }$ , the quotient of $A$ by its nilpotent radical.

Question 4. Let $k$ be a field of character $p > 0$ and consider $k ( t ) \subset k ( ( t ) )$

(1) Show that the field extension $k ( ( t ) ) / k ( t )$ is transcendental, i.e., $k ( ( t ) )$ contains at least one transcendental element over $k ( t )$ . (Hint: don’t spend too much time on this question.)

(2) Let $\alpha \in k [ [ t ] ]$ which is transcendental over $k ( t )$ , and write $\beta = \alpha ^ { p } \in k [ [ t ] ]$ . Let $K = k ( t , \beta )$ and $L = k ( t , \alpha )$ : both are subfields of $k ( ( t ) )$ . Let $A = k [ [ t ] ] \cap k ( t , \beta )$ . Determine the integral closure $B$ of $A$ in $L$ , and show that $A$ and $B$ are two discrete valuation rings.

(3) Is $B$ finitely generated over $A$ as a module? Justify your assertion.

Question 5. Let $p$ be a prime number. Consider $\mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ (resp. $\mathbb { Q } _ { p . }$ ) the ring of $p$ -adic integers (resp. field of $p$ -adic numbers). Clearly $\mathbb { Z } \subset \mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ .

(1) Show that the set $\mathbb { Z }$ is dense in $\mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ , and deduce that a map $f : \mathbb { Z } \to \mathbb { Q } _ { p }$ can be extended to a continuous function on $\mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ if and only if $f$ is uniformly continuous, i.e., for any $\epsilon > 0$ there exists some integer $N > 0$ so that $| f ( n ) - f ( m ) | < \epsilon$ for any integers $n , m \in \mathbb { Z }$ with $m \equiv n$ (mod $p ^ { N }$ ).

(2) Let $a \in \mathbb { Q } _ { p } \setminus \{ 0 \}$ . Under what condition on a, the map

$$
f: \mathbb {Z} \longrightarrow \mathbb {Q} _ {p}, \quad n \mapsto a ^ {n}
$$

can be extended to a continuous function over $\mathbb { Z } _ { p } \ell ^ { \cdot 2 }$ Justify your assertion.

(3) Assume that the condition in (2) is fulfilled. Can we even extend the function $f$ in (2) to a continuous map

$$
a ^ {x}: \mathbb {Q} _ {p} \longrightarrow \mathbb {Q} _ {p},
$$

so that $a ^ { x + y } = a ^ { x } a ^ { y }$ for any $x , y \in \mathbb { Q } _ { p } ?$ Justify your assertion.

Question 6. Let $n \geq 1$ be an integer and write $\Phi _ { n } ( X )$ the $n$ -th cyclotomic polynomial, that is, the minimal polynomial of a primitive $n$ -th root of unity in $\mathbb { C }$ over $\mathbb { Q }$ . Write also $\varphi ( n ) = \deg ( \Phi _ { n } ( X ) )$ .

(1) Let q be a power of a prime number such that $( q , n ) = 1$ . Show that $\Phi _ { n }$ , viewed as an element in $\mathbb { F } _ { q } [ X ]$ , can be decomposed as a product of $\varphi ( n ) / d$ irreducible polynomials of degree $d$ , with $d$ the order of $q$ in the multiplicative group $( \mathbb { Z } / n \mathbb { Z } ) ^ { \times }$ .

(2) From now on, assume $n = 2 ^ { r + 1 }$ for some integer $r \geq 1$ . Let $\zeta = \zeta _ { n }$ be a primitive $n$ -th root of unity and $K = \mathbb { Q } [ \zeta ]$ . Let $p$ be a prime with $p \equiv - 3$ (mod 8).

(a) For $x , y \in K = \mathbb { Q } [ \zeta ]$ , define

$$
(x, y) := \sum_ {\tau} \tau (x) \cdot \overline {{\tau (y)}}
$$

where $\tau$ runs through all the embeddings $K \hookrightarrow \mathbb { C }$ of $K$ into the field $\mathbb { C }$ of complex numbers. Write $K _ { \mathbb { R } } = K \otimes _ { \mathbb { Q } } \mathbb { R }$ , and we use the same notation to denote the (à priori $\mathbb { C }$ -valued) bilinear form on $K _ { \mathbb { R } }$ obtained by extension of scalars. Show that $( \cdot , \cdot )$ gives an inner product on $K _ { \mathbb { R } }$ and for $0 \leq i , j < 2 ^ { r }$ ,

$$
(\zeta^ {i}, \zeta^ {j}) = \left\{ \begin{array}{l l} 2 ^ {r}, & i f i = j; \\ 0, & o t h e r w i s e. \end{array} \right.
$$

In particular, we obtain an Euclidean space $K _ { \mathbb { R } }$ and $( \zeta ^ { i } / \sqrt { 2 ^ { r } } ) _ { 0 \leq i < 2 ^ { r } }$ is an orthonormal basis.

(b) Decompose $p { \mathcal { O } } _ { K }$ into a product of prime ideals.

(c) Let ${ \mathfrak { p } } \subset { \mathcal { O } } _ { K }$ be a prime ideal of $O _ { K }$ containing $p$ . Show that for every $\alpha \in { \mathfrak { p } }$ , $| \alpha | ^ { 2 } \in 2 ^ { r } p \mathbb { Z }$ and compute the length of the shortest non-zero vector in the prime ideal ${ \mathfrak { p } } \subset K _ { \mathbb { R } }$ .