# Algebra and Number Theory

Solve every problem.

Problem 1. Let $F$ be a field of characteristic zero. Consider the polynomial ring $F [ x _ { 1 } , \ldots , x _ { n } ]$

(a) Prove Newton’s identity over the field $F$

$$
p _ {k} - p _ {k - 1} e _ {1} + \dots + (- 1) ^ {k - 1} p _ {1} e _ {k - 1} + (- 1) ^ {k} k e _ {k} = 0,
$$

where

$$
e _ {k} \left(x _ {1}, \dots , x _ {n}\right) = \sum_ {1 \leq i _ {1} <   \dots <   \beta_ {k} \leq n} x _ {i _ {1}} \dots x _ {i _ {k}}
$$

for $1 \leq k \leq n$ , $e _ { 0 } = 1$ , $e _ { k } = 0$ when $k > n$ , and

$$
p _ {k} (x _ {1}, \dots , x _ {n}) = x _ {1} ^ {k} + \dots + x _ {n} ^ {k}.
$$

(b) Prove that over the field of $F$ of characteristic zero, an $n \times n$ matrix $A$ is nilpotent if and only if the trace of $A ^ { k }$ is equal to zero for all $k = 1 , 2 \ldots$

Hint: use Part (a).

(c) Prove that over the field of $F$ of characteristic zero, two $n \times n$ matrix $A$ and $B$ have the same characteristic polynomial if and only if the trace of $A ^ { k }$ and trace of $B ^ { k }$ are equal for all $k = 1 , 2 \dots$

Hint: use Part (a).

# Problem 2.

(a) Let $M$ be a finitely generated $R$ -module and ${ \mathfrak { a } } \subset R$ an ideal. Suppose $\phi : M \to M$ is an $R$ -module map such that $\phi ( M ) \subseteq \mathfrak { a } M$ φ. Prove that there is a monic polynomial $p ( t ) \subset R [ t ]$ φwith coefficients from a such that $p ( \phi ) = 0$ .

Hint: $p ( t )$ is basically just the characteristic polynomial.

(b) If $M$ is a finitely generated $R$ -module such that ${ \mathfrak { a } } M = M$ for some ideal ${ \mathfrak { a } } \subset R$ , then there exits $x \in R$ such that $1 - x \in { \mathfrak { a } }$ and $x M = 0$ .

Problem 3. Let $R = F [ x , y ] / ( y ^ { 2 } - x ^ { 2 } - x ^ { 3 } )$ for some field $F$ .

(a) Prove that $R$ is an integral domain.   
(b) Compute the normalization of $R$ (i.e., the integral closure of $R$ in its field of fraction).

Problem 4. Let $p$ and $\ell$ be two prime numbers and $[ \ell _ { x } ]$ denote the $\ell$ -th cyclotomic polynomial $1 + x + \cdot \cdot \cdot + x ^ { \ell - 1 }$

(a) Prove that $[ \ell _ { x } ]$ is an irreducible element of $\mathbb { Q } [ x ]$ .   
(b) Show that $[ \ell _ { x } ]$ is divisible by $x - 1$ in $\mathbb { F } _ { p } [ x ]$ if $p = \ell$ . Here $\mathbb { F } _ { p }$ is the finite field $\mathbb { Z } / p \mathbb { Z }$

(c) Suppose $p \neq \ell$ . let $a$ be the order of $p$ in $\mathbb { F } _ { \ell }$ . Show that $a$ is the first value of $m$ for which the group $\mathrm { G L } _ { m } ( \mathbb { F } _ { p } )$ of invertible $m \times m$ `matrices with entries from $\mathbb { F } _ { p }$ contains an element of order $\ell$ .

Hint: Derive and use the formula for the number of elements in $\mathrm { G L } _ { m } ( \mathbb { F } _ { p } )$

Problem 5. Let $p \geq 3$ be a prime number and let $\mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ be the ring of $p$ -adic integers.

(a) Show that an element in $1 + p \mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ is a $p$ -th power in $\mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ if and only if it lives in $1 + p ^ { 2 } \mathbb { Z } _ { p }$   
(b) Let $\mathbb { Z } _ { p } ^ { \times }$ denote the group of units in $\mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ . Show that there exist $a , b , c \in \mathbb { Z } _ { p } ^ { \times }$ such that $a ^ { p } + b ^ { p } = c ^ { p }$ if and only if

$$
\sum_ {i = 1} ^ {p - 1} i ^ {p - 2} t ^ {i} \equiv 0 (\mathrm {m o d} p)
$$

for some integer $t \in \{ 2 , 3 , . . . , p - 1 \}$ . (In particular, this condition holds for $p = 7$ by taking $t = 3$ , , . . . ,. Therefore, Fermat’s Last Theorem does not hold for $\mathbb { Z } _ { 7 }$ .)

Problem 6. Recall that a metric space is called spherically complete if any decreasing sequence of closed balls has nonempty intersection.

Let $p$ be a prime number and let $\mathbb { Q } _ { p }$ be the field of $p$ -adic numbers. For every integer $n \geq 1$ , consider the finite extension $\mathbb { Q } _ { p } ( \mu _ { p ^ { n } } )$ of $\mathbb { Q } _ { p }$ generated by all $p ^ { n }$ -th roots of unity. Let $\mathbb { Q } _ { p } ( \mu _ { p ^ { \infty } } ) =$ $\cup _ { n \geq 1 } \mathbb { Q } _ { p } ( \mu _ { p ^ { n } } )$ µ. All of these algebraic extensions of $\mathbb { Q } _ { p }$ µare equipped with the unique norm $| \cdot |$ µextending the usual $p$ -adic norm on $\mathbb { Q } _ { p }$ .

Question: Which of the following are spherically complete? Explain why.

(a) $\mathbb { Q } _ { p }$   
(b) $\mathbb { Q } _ { p } ( \mu _ { p ^ { n } } )$   
(c) $\mathbb { Q } _ { p } ( \mu _ { p ^ { \infty } } )$   
(d) $\overline { { \mathbb { Q } _ { p } ( \mu _ { p ^ { \infty } } ) } }$ , the completion of $\mathbb { Q } _ { p } ( \mu _ { p ^ { \infty } } )$ .

Hint: Show that there exists a sequence $a _ { 1 } , a _ { 2 } , . . . \in \widehat { \mathbb { Q } _ { p } ( \mu _ { p ^ { \infty } } ) }$ such that $| a _ { 1 } | > | a _ { 2 } | > \cdots$ and lim $\left| a _ { i } \right| > 0$ , and such that the closed balls

$$
B _ {i} := \left\{x \in \widehat {\mathbb {Q} _ {p} \left(\mu_ {p ^ {\infty}}\right)}: | x - a _ {1} - a _ {2} - \dots - a _ {i} | \leq | a _ {i} | \right\}
$$

have empty intersection.