# INDIVIDUAL TEST S.-T YAU COLLEGE MATH CONTESTS 2012

Algebra and Number Theory Please solve 5 out of the following 6 problems, or highest scores of 5 problems will be counted.

1. Prove that the polynomial $x ^ { 6 } + 3 0 x ^ { 5 } - 1 5 x ^ { 3 } + 6 x - 1 2 0$ cannot be written as a product of two polynomials of rational coefficients and positive degrees.

2. Let $\mathbb { F } _ { p }$ be the field of $p$ -elements and $G L _ { n } ( \mathbb { F } _ { p } )$ the group of invertible $n$ by $n$ matrices.

(1) Compute the order of $G L _ { n } ( \mathbb { F } _ { p } )$   
(2) Find a Sylow p-subgroup of $G L _ { n } ( \mathbb { F } _ { p } )$   
(3) Compute the number of Sylow p-subgroups.

3. Let $V$ be a finite dimensional vector space over complex field $\mathbb { C }$ with a nondegenerate symmetric bilinear form $( , )$ . Let

$$
O (V) = \{g \in G L (V) | (g u, g v) = (u, v), u, v \in V \}
$$

be the orthogonal group. Prove that fixed point subspace $( V \otimes _ { \mathbb { C } } V ) ^ { \mathsf { O } ( \mathsf { V } ) }$ is 1-dimensional.

4. Let $\mathfrak { D }$ be the ring consisting of all linear differential operators of finite order on $\mathbb { R }$ with polynomial coefficients, of the form

$$
D = \sum_ {i = 0} ^ {n} a _ {i} (x) \frac {d ^ {i}}{d x ^ {i}}
$$

for some natural number $n \in \mathbb N$ and polynomials $a _ { 0 } ( x ) , \dotsb , a _ { n } ( x ) \in$ $\mathbb { R } [ x ]$ . This ring $\mathfrak { D }$ operates naturally on $M : = \mathbb { R } [ x ]$ , making $M$ a left $\mathfrak { D }$ -module.

(1) (to warm up) Suppose that $b ( x ) \in \mathbb { R } [ x ]$ is a non-zero polynomial in $M$ , and let $c ( x )$ be any element in $M$ . Show that there is an element $D \in \mathfrak { D }$ such that $D ( b ( x ) ) = c ( x )$ .   
(2) Suppose that $m$ is a positive integer, $b _ { 1 } ( x ) , \cdot \cdot \cdot , b _ { m } ( x )$ are $m$ polynomials in $M$ linearly independent over $\mathbb { R }$ and $c _ { 1 } ( x ) , \cdot \cdot \cdot , c _ { m } ( x )$ are $m$ polynomials in $M$ . Prove that there exists an element $D \in \mathfrak { D }$ such that $D ( b _ { i } ( x ) ) = c _ { i } ( x )$ for $i = 1 , \cdots , m$ .

5. Let $\Lambda$ be a lattice of $\mathbb { C }$ , i.e., a subgroup generated by two $\mathbb { R }$ -linear independent elements. Let $R$ be the subring of $\mathbb { C }$ consists of elements $\alpha$ such that $\alpha \Lambda \subset \Lambda$ . Let $R ^ { \times }$ denote the group of invertible elements in $R$ .

(1) Show that either $R = \mathbb { Z }$ or have rank 2 over $\mathbb { Z }$

(2) Let $n \geq 3$ be a positive integer and $( R / n R ) ^ { \times }$ the group of invertible elements in the quotient $R / n R$ . Show that the canonical group homomorphism

$$
R ^ {\times} \rightarrow (R / n R) ^ {\times}
$$

is injective.

(3) Find maximal size of $R ^ { \times }$ .

6. Let $V$ be a (possible) infinite dimensional vector space over $\mathbb { R }$ with a positive definite quadratic norm $\| \cdot \|$ . Let $A$ be an additive subgroup of $V$ with following properties:

(1) $A / 2 A$ is finite;   
(2) for any real number $c$ the set

$$
\{a \in A: \| a \| <   c \}
$$

is finite.

Prove that $A$ is of finite rank over $\mathbb { Z }$ .