# S.-T. Yau College Student Mathematics Contests 2023

# Algebra and Number Theory

Solve every problem.

1. Let $F$ be a field. Let $n \geq 2$ be an integer. For $1 \leq i \neq j \leq n$ and for $\lambda \in F$ , set $E _ { i j } ( \lambda ) = \left( e _ { k l } \right)$ the following $n \times n$ -matrix such that

$$
e _ {k l} = \left\{ \begin{array}{l l} 1, & \text {i f} k = l; \\ \lambda , & \text {i f} (k, l) = (i, j); \\ 0, & \text {o t h e r w i s e .} \end{array} \right.
$$

(1) Show that the special linear group $\mathbf { S L } _ { n } ( F )$ can be generated by the matrices $E _ { i j } ( \lambda )$ ( $1 \leq i \neq j \leq n$ and $\lambda \in F$ ).   
(2) Assume $n \geq 3$ . Show that the general linear group $\mathbf { G L } _ { n } ( F )$ is not solvable. Hint: one can start by computing the commutators of the matrices $E _ { i j } ( \lambda )$ .   
(3) Assume $n = 2$ and $F ^ { \prime }$ is a field containing at least 4 elements. Show that $\mathbf { G L } _ { n } ( F )$ is not solvable either. Hint: one can start by computing the commutator of the matrix $E _ { 1 2 } ( \lambda )$ with a diagonal matrix.   
(4) Let $\mathbb { F } _ { q }$ denote the finite field with $q$ elements. Are $\mathbf { G L } _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { F } _ { 2 } )$ and $\mathbf { G L } _ { 2 } ( \mathbb { F } _ { 3 } )$ solvable? Justifiy your assertion.

2. Let $R$ be a ring with identity $1 \neq 0$

(1) Assume that $R$ is commutative. Show that, if we have an isomorphism $R ^ { n } \simeq R ^ { m }$ of $R$ -modules for some positive integers $n$ and $m$ , then $m = n$ .   
(2) The analogous assertion of (1) for a non-commutative ring is not true in general as shown by the following example (in particular, the notion of "rank" of a finite free module over such rings is not well-defined). Let $K$ be a non-trivial (not necessarily commutative) ring with identity, and $F$ be a free $K$ -module with a countable basis indexed by $\mathbb { Z } _ { \geq 1 }$ :

$$
e _ {1}, \dots , e _ {2}, \dots , e _ {n} \dots .
$$

Write $R = \operatorname { E n d } _ { K } ( F )$ , which is a ring with the usual addition and composition of two $K$ -linear endomorphisms of $F$ .

(a) Show that $R$ is not commutative.   
(b) Let $f _ { 0 } \in R$ (resp. $f _ { 1 } \in R$ ) such that $f _ { 0 } ( e _ { 2 i } ) = e _ { i }$ and $f _ { 0 } ( e _ { 2 i - 1 } ) = 0$ (resp. $f _ { 1 } ( e _ { 2 i } ) = 0$ and $f _ { 1 } ( e _ { 2 i - 1 } ) = e _ { i }$ ) for every $i \in \mathbb { Z } _ { \geq 1 }$ . Show that $\{ f _ { 0 } , f _ { 1 } \}$ is a basis of $R$ as a left $R$ -module (given by left-multiplication).   
(c) For any integers $n , m \geq 1$ , show that there exists an isomorphism $R ^ { n } \stackrel { \sim } { \to } R ^ { m }$ of $R$ -modules.

3. Let $G$ be a profinite gorup. We say that it is topologically finitely generated if there exist finitely many elements $g _ { 1 } , \ldots , g _ { n }$ such that the closed subgroup generated by $g _ { 1 } , \ldots , g _ { n }$ is equal to $G$ .

(1) Assume that $G$ is topologically finitely generated. Show that, for a fixed positive integer $n$ , $G$ has only finitely many open subgroups of index $n$ .   
(2) Show that, for $K$ a number field (i.e., a finite field extension of $\mathbb { Q }$ ), its absolute Galois group $G _ { K }$ is not topologically finitely generated.

4. Let $R$ be a commutative ring with identity. An $R$ -module $M$ is said to be of finite presentation if there exists an exact sequence of $R$ -modules

$$
R ^ {n} \longrightarrow R ^ {m} \longrightarrow M \longrightarrow 0
$$

for some positive integers $m , n \geq 0$

(1) Let $f : N \to M$ be a surjective morphism of $R$ -modules with $N$ of finite type and $M$ of finite presentation. Show that the $R$ -module $\ker ( f )$ is of finite type.   
(2) Let $M$ be an $R$ -module of finite type. Show that the following statements are equivalent.

(a) $M$ is flat and of finite presentation.   
(b) $M$ is locally free, i.e., there exist $f _ { 1 } , \dots , f _ { s } \in R$ generating the unit ideal of $R$ such that $M _ { f _ { i } }$ is free over $R _ { f _ { i } }$ .   
(c) $M$ is projective as an $R$ -module.

(3) Let $\textstyle S = \prod _ { \mathbb { N } } R$ the product of countably many copies of $R$ , and $I = \oplus _ { \mathbb { N } } R \subset S$ Show that $S / I$ is a flat $S$ -module which is not projective.

5. Let $p$ be a prime number. Let $\mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ be the ring of $p$ -adic integers.

(1) Let $a \in \mathbb { C }$ such that $\begin{array} { r } { \operatorname* { l i m } _ { r \to \infty } { a ^ { p ^ { r } } } = 1 } \end{array}$ . Show that $a$ is a $p ^ { m }$ -th root of unity for some $m$ .   
(2) Let $A \in \mathbf { M } _ { n \times n } ( \mathbb { C } )$ be an $n \times n$ complex matrix such that $\begin{array} { r } { \operatorname* { l i m } _ { r \to \infty } A ^ { p ^ { r } } = I _ { n } } \end{array}$ , with $I _ { n }$ the identity matrix. Show that $A ^ { p \prime \prime \prime } = I _ { n }$ for some integer $m$ .   
(3) Determine, up to isomorphisms, all the finite-dimensional continuous complex representations of $\mathbb { Z } _ { p }$ .

6. Let $p$ be a prime number. Let $K$ be a $p$ -adic local field, i.e., a finite field extension of $\mathbb { Q } _ { p }$ . Denote by $O _ { K }$ its ring of integers, with $\pi \in { \mathcal { O } } _ { K }$ a uniformizer.

(1) Show that, the following logarithm map

$$
\log : 1 + p \mathcal {O} _ {K} \longrightarrow p \mathcal {O} _ {K}, \quad 1 + x \mapsto x - \frac {x ^ {2}}{2} + \frac {x ^ {3}}{3} + \dots
$$

is a well-defined isomorphism of groups, which can be extended in a unique way to a group homomorphism

$$
\log_ {\pi}: K ^ {\times} \longrightarrow K,
$$

such that $\log _ { \pi } ( \pi ) = 0$ . Determine the kernel of $\log _ { \pi }$

(2) With the help of the logarithm above, show that for any integer $n \geq 1$ , the group quotient $K ^ { \times } / K ^ { \times , n }$ is a finite group.