# S.-T. Yau College Student Mathematics Contests 2025

# Algebra and Number Theory (5 problems)

Problem 1. Let $F$ be a field of characteristic 6= 2. Let $F ^ { * }$ be the multiplicative group of non-zero elements of $F$ , and $F ^ { * 2 } : = \{ a ^ { 2 } | a \in F ^ { * } \} \subset F ^ { * }$ . Show that $F$ has a Galois extension of group $\mathbb { Z } / 2 \mathbb { Z } \times \mathbb { Z } / 2 \mathbb { Z }$ if and only if $[ F ^ { * } : F ^ { * 2 } ] > 2$ . Furthermore, show that such Galois extensions are precisely the splitting fields of irreducible polynomials of the form

$$
X ^ {4} + a X ^ {2} + b \in F [ X ]
$$

with $b \in F ^ { * 2 }$ .

Problem 2. Let p be prime number, $e , f \in \mathbb { Z } _ { \geq 1 }$ . Let $G$ be a finite group of order $n : = e f$ generated by two elements $\sigma$ and $\tau$ , satisfying the relations

$$
\sigma^ {f} = 1, \quad \tau^ {e} = 1, \quad a n d \quad \sigma \tau \sigma^ {- 1} = \tau^ {p}.
$$

(1) Show that such a group $G$ exists if and only if $p ^ { f } \equiv 1$ (mod e). If the latter condition is satisfied, there exists, up to isomorphisms, a unique finite group $G$ as described above.   
(2) Let $\mathbb { F } _ { p ^ { f } }$ denote the finite field with $p ^ { f }$ elements, and $\eta \in \mathbb { F } _ { p ^ { f } }$ a primitive e-th root of unity. Let $G$ act on $A : = \mathbb { F } _ { p ^ { f } }$ via

$$
\sigma (a) = a ^ {p}, \quad \tau (a) = \eta \cdot a.
$$

Show that the following three assertions are equivalent:

(a) The $\mathbb { F } _ { p }$ -representation $A$ of $G$ is absolutely irreducible in the sense that the $C$ -representation $C \otimes _ { \mathbb { F } _ { p } } A$ of $G$ is irreducible, where $C$ is any algebraically closed field containing $\mathbb { F } _ { p }$ ;   
(b) the $\mathbb { F } _ { p }$ -representation $A$ of $G$ is irreducible;   
(c) $p$ is of order $f$ in $( \mathbb { Z } / e \mathbb { Z } ) ^ { \times }$ .

Problem 3. Let $k$ be field.

(1) Let $R$ be the localization of the polynomial ring $k [ T ]$ at the prime ideal (T ). Let $n \geq 1$ be an integer. Let $\alpha _ { 1 } , \ldots , \alpha _ { n } \in k \setminus \{ 0 \}$ be non-zero elements that are mutually different. Show that the following elements

$$
\frac {1}{T - \alpha_ {i}}, \quad 1 \leq i \leq n
$$

form a basis of the $k$ -vector space $R / ( T ^ { n } )$ .

(2) Let $A \subset k$ be an infinite subset (thus k is an infinite field). Let $K / k$ be a finite field extension. Let $V \subset K ( T )$ be the $k$ -subspace of the rational function field $K ( T )$ generated by

$$
\frac {1}{T - \alpha}, \quad \alpha \in A.
$$

Let $\beta \in K \setminus A$ and consider the following additive valuation

$$
\operatorname {o r d} _ {\beta}: K (T) \longrightarrow \mathbb {Z} \cup \{\infty \}
$$

normalized by $\mathrm { o r d } _ { \beta } ( T - \beta ) = 1$ . Let $\Omega : = \{ { \mathrm { o r d } } _ { \beta } ( f ) : f \in V \} \subset \mathbb { Z }$ , and for $n \geq 1$

$$
u _ {n} := \# (\Omega \cap \{0, 1 \dots , n - 1 \}).
$$

Show that $\begin{array} { r } { \frac { u _ { n } } { n } \geq \frac { 1 } { [ K : k ] } } \end{array}$ .

Problem 4. Let $E / F$ be a finite Galois extension of p-adic local fields, with Galois group Γ. Write $O _ { F }$ and $O _ { E }$ their rings of integers.

(1) Assume that $E / F$ is unramified. Show that the following map

$$
\alpha : \mathcal {O} _ {E} \otimes_ {\mathcal {O} _ {F}} \mathcal {O} _ {E} \longrightarrow \prod_ {\gamma \in \Gamma} \mathcal {O} _ {E}, \quad c \otimes x \mapsto (c \gamma (x)) _ {\gamma \in \Gamma}
$$

is an isomorphism. Here $\Pi _ { \gamma \in \Gamma } \mathcal { O } _ { E }$ denotes the product of copies of $O _ { E }$ indexed by Γ.

(2) Assume that $E / F$ is unramified. Let $\mathcal { M }$ be an $\mathcal { O } _ { E }$ -module equipped with a semi-linear action of Γ: so for $\gamma \in \Gamma$ we have

$$
\gamma (a \cdot m) = \gamma (a) \cdot \gamma (m), \quad \forall a \in \mathcal {O} _ {E}, m \in \mathcal {M}.
$$

Show that the following natural map

$$
\iota_ {M}: \mathcal {O} _ {E} \otimes_ {\mathcal {O} _ {F}} \mathcal {M} ^ {\Gamma} \longrightarrow \mathcal {M}, \quad a \otimes m \mapsto a m.
$$

is an isomorphism. Here $\mathcal { M } ^ { \Gamma } = \{ m \in M | \gamma ( m ) = m , \forall \gamma \in \Gamma \} .$ .

(3) Assume that $E / F$ is unramified. Write $\mathbf { M o d } _ { \mathcal { O } _ { F } }$ be the category of ${ \mathcal { O } } _ { F }$ -modules, and $\mathbf { M o d } _ { \mathcal { O } _ { E } } ^ { \Gamma }$ be the category of $O _ { E }$ -modules equipped with a semi-linear action of Γ. Show that the natural functor

$$
\Phi_ {E / F}: \mathbf {M o d} _ {\mathcal {O} _ {F}} \longrightarrow \mathbf {M o d} _ {\mathcal {O} _ {E}} ^ {\Gamma}, \quad M \mapsto \mathcal {O} _ {E} \otimes_ {\mathcal {O} _ {F}} M
$$

is an equivalence of categories.

(4) Assume that $E / F$ is ramified. Is the corresponding functor $\Phi _ { E / F }$ still an equivalence of categories? Justify your assertion.

Problem 5. Consider the polynomial $f ( X ) = X ^ { 5 } - X + 1 \in \mathbb { Q } [ X ]$ . Write $E / \mathbb { Q }$ its splitting field over $\mathbb { Q }$ . Recall that for a polynomial $X ^ { 5 } + a X + b \in \mathbb { Q } [ X ]$ , its discriminant is $4 ^ { 4 } a ^ { 5 } + 5 ^ { 5 } b ^ { 4 }$ .

(1) Show that $f ( X ) \in \mathbb { Q } [ X ]$ is irreducible.   
(2) Determine all the finite primes p that are ramified in $E$ , and compute the order of the inertia subgroups.   
(3) Show that $E / \mathbb { Q } [ { \sqrt { D } } ]$ is unramified at all finite primes of √ $\mathbb { Q } [ { \sqrt { D } } ]$ , and that it is ramified at the Archimedean primes of $\mathbb { Q } [ { \sqrt { D } } ]$ .   
(4) Show that $\operatorname { G a l } ( E / \mathbb { Q } )$ can be generated by its inertia subgroups.   
(5) Show that $\operatorname { G a l } ( E / \mathbb { Q } ) \simeq S _ { 5 }$ , and $\operatorname { G a l } ( E / \mathbb { Q } ( { \sqrt { D } } ) ) \simeq A _ { 5 }$ .